KB article for NetApp Trident CSI Driver (#38)
harvester/harvesterhci.io: kb/2023-08-11/using_netapp_third_party_storage.md

description: Installation procedure for NetApp Astra Trident CSI Driver
slug: install_netapp_trident_csi
authors:
  - name: Jeff Radick
    title: Staff Software Engineer
tags: [harvester]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

Instructions for installing the Netapp Astra Trident CSI driver
into a Harvester cluster.

This enables use of NetApp storage systems to store storage volumes
usable by virtual machines running in Harvester.

The NetApp storage will be an option in addition to the normal
Longhorn storage; it will not replace Longhorn.
Virtual machine images will still be stored using Longhorn.

This has been tested with Harvester 1.2.0 and Trident v23.07.0.

This procedure only works to access storage via iSCSI, not NFS.

Note also that 3rd party storage classes (including those based on Trident)
can only be used for non-boot volumes of Harvester VMs.

== Detailed Instructions

We are assuming that before beginning this procedure,
a Harvester cluster and a NetApp ONTAP storage system
are both installed and configured for use.

Follow all of the following steps, but ONLY on the initial cluster node.

The last step (setting up multipathd) should be done on all nodes,

> AFTER the initial node has had Trident installed.

Reviewer: we should rephrase this to may be `After the Trident CSI has been installed` it does not matter how many nodes the cluster already has.

Author: Done

1. Read the NetApp Astra Trident documentation
       https://docs.netapp.com/us-en/trident/
       https://docs.netapp.com/us-en/trident/trident-get-started/kubernetes-deploy-operator.html
   We are describing the "manual deployment" procedure here.

> 2. Log into the Harvester cluster in one of the nodes.

Reviewer: users need to login to one of the `master` nodes or download the kubeconfig and run the commands locally.

Author: I think in my major revision I've described the method for downloading and using the kubeconfig locally, along with the procedure for using helm.  Your feedback on those changes will be appreciated.

Author: I didn't say anything about doing stuff on a `master` node though.  Perhaps I should?

Author: I actually did put in a few words about this later on.

4.a. Create the TridentOrchestrator CRD
   - `kubectl create -f deploy/crds/trident.netapp.io_tridentorchestrators_crd_post1.16.yaml`
4.b. Deploy the Trident operator (assuming the "trident" namespace)
   - `kubectl apply -f deploy/namespace.yaml`
   - `kubectl apply -f deploy/bundle_post_1_25.yaml`
   The operator, deployment, and replicasets can be verified with:
   - `kubectl get all -n trident`
4.c. Create the TridentOrchestrator and install Trident
   - `kubectl create -f deploy/crds/tridentorchestrator_cr.yaml`
   This will take a while (a few minutes); you can check progress with
   - `kubectl desribe torc trident`
   The last few lines of output will tell you whether the installation
   has completed successfully.  When it has finished, the last few
   lines should look something like this:

```
Events:
    Type Reason Age From Message ---- ------ ---- ---- -------Normal
    Installing 74s trident-operator.netapp.io Installing Trident Normal
    Installed 67s trident-operator.netapp.io Trident installed
```

4.d. Verify the installation
   - `kubectl get pods -n trident`
   - `./tridentctl -n trident version`

5. Install a backend.
   This part is specific to Harvester.

> 5.a.    Put the following into a text file, for example /tmp/backend.yaml

Reviewer: we should may be add some explanation for the fields in the backend.yaml? or also point to the official spec?

Author: I didn't think of this.  I will have to look up the right doc.  At the moment, this part is magic to me.

```
---
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: ontap-san-economy
provisioner: csi.trident.netapp.io
parameters:
  selector: "name=default_backend_san"
---
apiVersion: snapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: VolumeSnapshotClass
metadata:
  name: csi-snapclass
driver: csi.trident.netapp.io
deletionPolicy: Delete
```

6.b. Apply the definitions:
    - `kubectl apply -f /tmp/storage.yaml`

7. Enable multipathd
   The following is required to enable multipathd.
   This must be done on every node of the Harvester cluster.
   The preceding steps should only be done once on a single node.
7.a. Create this file in `/oem/99_multipathd.yaml`:
```
stages:
   default:
     - name: "Setup multipathd"
       systemctl:
         enable:
          - multipathd
         start:
          - multipathd
```
7.b. Enable multipathd
    The above file will take effect on the next reboot of the node;
    multipathd can be enabled immediately without rebooting the node
    using the following commands:
    - `systemctl enable multipathd`
    - `systemctl start multipathd`

After the above steps, the `ontap-san-economy` storage class

> should be available for use when creating a volume for

Reviewer: can we please add info on either disabling mutlipathd for longhorn or additional steps for disabling multipathd support in ontap, plus reasons for the same.

Author: I think I've done this now.  We've discussed what I've done but any comments on the results will be appreciated

               enable:
               - multipathd
               start:
               - multipathd
      ```

   1. Configure `multipathd` to exclude pathnames used by Longhorn.

      This part is a little tricky.  `multipathd` will automatically discover
      device names matching a certain pattern, and attempt to set up multipathing on them.
      Unfortunately, Longhorn's device names follow the same pattern, and
      will not work correctly if `multipathd` tries to use those devices.

      Therefore the file `/etc/multipath.conf` must be set up on each node
      so as to prevent `multipathd` from touching any of the devices
      that Longhorn will use.  Unfortunately, it is not possible to know
      in advance which device names will be used until the volumes are attached
      to a VM when the VM is started, or when the volumes are hot-added to a running VM.
      The recommended method is to "whitelist" the Trident devices using device
      properties rather than device naming.  The properties to allow are the
      device vendor and product.  Here is an example of what you'll want in `/etc/multipath.conf`:

       ```text
       blacklist {
           device {

>                vendor "!NETAPP"

Reviewer 2: I probably missed something here. What's the reason we decide to whitelist `NetApp` instead of blacklist `Longhorn`?

Author: I was not able to find any discernible property I could check for in the multipath.conf or even via a script that would positively identify Longhorn devices.  The device names used by Longhorn are of the form `/dev/sd*` but so are the device names used for the NetApp LUNs.  The device names used by Longhorn (and NetApp for that matter) don't even appear in `/dev` until the VM using those volumes gets created, and there was nothing I know how to put in the multipath.conf that would allow me to prevent multipathd from seeing those Longhorn devices.  The only thing I was able to come up with was the device vendor and product strings.  I am not aware of vendor and product strings consistently used by Longhorn.  In my test setup I see a vendor of "IET" (whatever or whoever that is) and a product of "VIRTUAL-DISK" but that might be because my test environment has my Harvester nodes running as VMs on a harvester system, and those strings might be coming from the underlying QEMU/KVM.  I'm not sure.

I could spend more time trying to figure this out, and I may or may not find something better.  For the simple case where NetApp is the only 3rd party storage provider, I know this works, and it seems better to provide a simple working solution than hold out for a perfect universal solution that might not be there.

Reviewer 2: Ok. This is something Longhorn team should fix. We should be able to identify Longhorn volumes as easy as those NetApp volumes. cc @innobead

---
title: Using NetApp Storage on Harvester
description: Installation procedure for NetApp Astra Trident CSI Driver
slug: install_netapp_trident_csi
authors:
  - name: Jeff Radick
    title: Staff Software Engineer
tags: [harvester]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

> Instructions for installing the Netapp Astra Trident CSI driver into a Harvester cluster.

Author: done

> This enables use of NetApp storage systems to store storage volumes usable by virtual machines running in Harvester.

Author: done

The NetApp storage will be an option in addition to the normal Longhorn storage; it will not replace Longhorn. Virtual machine images will still be stored using Longhorn.

This has been tested with Harvester 1.2.0 and Trident v23.07.0.

This procedure only works to access storage via iSCSI, not NFS.

:::note
3rd party storage classes (including those based on Trident) can only be used for non-boot volumes of Harvester VMs.
:::

# Detailed Instructions

We are assuming that before beginning this procedure,
a Harvester cluster and a NetApp ONTAP storage system

> are both installed and configured for use.

Author: done

> Most of these steps can be performed on any system that has the `helm` and `kubectl` commands installed, and which has network connectivity to the management port of the Harvester cluster.  Let's call this your workstation.  Certain steps must be performed on one or more cluster nodes themselves.  The steps described below should be done on your workstation unless otherwise indicated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most of these steps can be performed on any system with the `helm` and `kubectl` commands installed and network connectivity to the management port of the Harvester cluster. Let's call this your workstation. Certain steps must be performed on one or more cluster nodes themselves. The steps described below should be done on your workstation unless otherwise indicated.
```

Author: done

> The last step (setting up multipathd) should be done on all nodes,
> after the Trident CSI has been installed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The last step (enabling multipathd) should be done on all nodes after the Trident CSI has been installed.
```

Author: done

> Certain parameters of your installation will require modification of details in the examples in the procedure given below. This which you may wish to modify include:

Reviewer 4: perhaps "Those which you may wish to modify"?

Author: right

Author: done

> Certain parameters of your installation will require modification of details in the examples in the procedure given below. Those which you may wish to modify include:
> 
> * The namespace.  `trident` is used as the namespace in the examples, but you may prefer to use another.
> * The name of the deployment. `mytrident` is used but you can change this to something else.
> * The management IP address of the ONTAP storage system
> * Login credentials (username and password) of the ONTAP storage system

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specific installation parameters will require modification of details in the examples in the procedure given below. Those which you may wish to modify include:

* The namespace. `trident` is used as the namespace in the examples, but you may prefer to use another.
* The deployment's name. `mytrident` is used, but you can change this to something else.
* The management IP address of the ONTAP storage system.
* Login credentials (username and password) of the ONTAP storage system.
```

The procedure is as follows.

> 1. Read the NetApp Astra Trident documentation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Read the following NetApp Astra Trident documentation:
```

   * https://docs.netapp.com/us-en/trident/
   * https://docs.netapp.com/us-en/trident/trident-get-started/kubernetes-deploy-operator.html
   * https://docs.netapp.com/us-en/trident/trident-get-started/kubernetes-deploy-helm.html#deploy-the-trident-operator-and-install-astra-trident-using-helm

   The simplest method is to install using Helm; that process is described here.

> 1. Download the KubeConfig from the Harvester cluster.
> 
>    * Open the web UI for your Harvester cluster
>    * In the lower left corner, click the "Support" link.  This will take you to a "Harvester Support" page.
>    * Click the button labeled "Download KubeConfig".  This will download a your cluster config in a file called "local.yaml" by default.
>    * Move this file to a convenient location and set your `KUBECONFIG` environment variable to the path of this file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Download the KubeConfig from the Harvester cluster.

   1. Open the web UI for your Harvester cluster.
   1. In the lower-left corner, select the **Support** link. This will take you to the **Harvester Support** page.
   1. Select "Download KubeConfig". This will download your cluster's config file, named `local.yaml` by default.
   1. Move this file to a convenient location and set your `KUBECONFIG` environment variable to the path of this file.
```

> 1. Prepare the cluster for installation of the Helm chart.
> 
>    Before starting installation of the helm chart, special authorization must be provided to enable certain modifications to be made during the installation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Prepare the cluster for installation of the Helm chart.

   Before starting the installation of the helm chart, you must provide special authorization to enable certain modifications to be made during the installation.
```

>    * Put the following text into a file.  For this example we'll call it `authorize_trident.yaml`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Put the following text into a file. For this example, we'll call it `authorize_trident.yaml`.
```

      ```yaml
      ---
      apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
      kind: ClusterRole
      metadata:
        name: trident-operator-psa
      rules:
      - apiGroups:
        - management.cattle.io
        resources:
        - projects
        verbs:
        - updatepsa
      ---
      apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
      kind: ClusterRoleBinding
      metadata:
        name: trident-operator-psa
      roleRef:
        apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
        kind: ClusterRole
        name: trident-operator-psa
      subjects:
      - kind: ServiceAccount
        name: trident-operator
        namespace: trident
      ```

>    * Apply this manifest via the command `kubectl apply -f authorize_trident.yaml`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Apply this manifest via the command `kubectl apply -f authorize_trident.yaml`.
```

1. Install the helm chart.

>    * First you will need to add the Astra Trident Helm repository:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. First you will need to add the Astra Trident Helm repository:
```

      ```shell
      helm repo add netapp-trident https://netapp.github.io/trident-helm-chart
      ```

>    * Next, install the Helm cart.  This example uses `mytrident` as the deployment name, `trident` as the namespace, and 23.07.0 as the version number to install:

Reviewer 4: "helm chart" not cart

Author: right

>    * Next, install the Helm chart.  This example uses `mytrident` as the deployment name, `trident` as the namespace, and 23.07.0 as the version number to install:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Next, install the Helm chart. This example uses `mytrident` as the deployment name, `trident` as the namespace, and `23.07.0` as the version number to install:
```

      ```shell
      helm install mytrident netapp-trident/trident-operator --version 23.07.0 --create-namespace --namespace trident
      ```

>    * The NetApp documentation describes variations on how you can do this.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The NetApp documentation describes variations on how you can do this.
```

> 1. Download and extract the tridentctl command, which will be needed for the next few steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Download and extract the tridentctl command, which is needed for the next few steps:
```

   ```shell
   cd /tmp
   curl -L -o trident-installer-23.07.0.tar.gz https://github.com/NetApp/trident/releases/download/v23.07.0/trident-installer-23.07.0.tar.gz
   tar -xf trident-installer-23.07.0.tar.gz
   cd trident-installer
   ```

1. Install a backend.

   This part is specific to Harvester.

   1. Put the following into a text file, for example /tmp/backend.yaml

      ```yaml
      version: 1
      backendName: default_backend_san
      storageDriverName: ontap-san-economy
      managementLIF: 172.19.97.114
      svm: default_backend
      username: admin
      password: password1234
      labels:
      name: default_backend_san
      ```

    The LIF IP address, username, and password of this file
    should be replaced with the management LIF and credentials
    for the ONTAP system.

>    1. Create the backend

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Create the backend.
```

      ```shell
      ./tridentctl create backend -f /tmp/backend.yaml -n trident
      ```

>    1. Check that it is created

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Check that it is created.
```

      ```shell
      ./tridentctl get backend -n trident
      ```

1. Define a StorageClass and SnapshotClass.

>    1. Put the following into a file, for example `/tmp/storage.yaml`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Put the following into a file, for example `/tmp/storage.yaml`.
```

      ```yaml
      ---
      apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
      kind: StorageClass
      metadata:
      name: ontap-san-economy
      provisioner: csi.trident.netapp.io
      parameters:
      selector: "name=default_backend_san"
      ---
      apiVersion: snapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1
      kind: VolumeSnapshotClass
      metadata:
      name: csi-snapclass
      driver: csi.trident.netapp.io
      deletionPolicy: Delete
      ```

>    1. Apply the definitions:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Apply the definitions.
```

      ```shell
      kubectl apply -f /tmp/storage.yaml
      ```

> 1. Enable multipathd

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Enable multipathd. The following is required to enable multipathd. This must be done on every node of the Harvester cluster. The preceding steps should only be done once on a single node.
```

>    The following is required to enable multipathd.
>    This must be done on every node of the Harvester cluster.
>    The preceding steps should only be done once on a single node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

   1. Create this file in `/oem/99_multipathd.yaml`:

      ```yaml
      stages:
         default:
         - name: "Setup multipathd"
            systemctl:
               enable:
               - multipathd
               start:
               - multipathd
      ```

>    1. Configure `multipathd` to exclude pathnames used by Longhorn.
> 
>       This part is a little tricky.  `multipathd` will automatically discover
>       device names matching a certain pattern, and attempt to set up multipathing on them.
>       Unfortunately, Longhorn's device names follow the same pattern, and
>       will not work correctly if `multipathd` tries to use those devices.
> 
>       Therefore the file `/etc/multipath.conf` must be set up on each node
>       so as to prevent `multipathd` from touching any of the devices
>       that Longhorn will use.  Unfortunately, it is not possible to know
>       in advance which device names will be used until the volumes are attached
>       to a VM when the VM is started, or when the volumes are hot-added to a running VM.
>       The recommended method is to "whitelist" the Trident devices using device
>       properties rather than device naming.  The properties to allow are the
>       device vendor and product.  Here is an example of what you'll want in `/etc/multipath.conf`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Configure `multipathd` to exclude pathnames used by Longhorn.

      This part is a little tricky. `multipathd` will automatically discover device names matching a specific pattern and attempt to set up multipathing on them. Unfortunately, Longhorn's device names follow the same pattern and will not work correctly if `multipathd` tries to use those devices.

      Therefore, the file `/etc/multipath.conf` must be set up on each node to prevent `multipathd` from touching any devices that Longhorn will use. Unfortunately, it is not possible to know in advance which device names will be used until the volumes are attached to a VM when the VM is started or when the volumes are hot-added to a running VM. The recommended method is to "whitelist" the Trident devices using device properties rather than device naming. The properties to allow are the device vendor and product. Here is an example of what you'll want in `/etc/multipath.conf`:
```

       ```text
       blacklist {
           device {
               vendor "!NETAPP"
               product "!LUN"
           }
       }
       blacklist_exceptions {
           device {
               vendor "NETAPP"
               product "LUN"
           }
       }
       ```

>        This is only an example that works if NetApp is the only storage provider in the system
>        for which `multipathd` must be used.  More complex environments will require
>        more complex configuration.
> 
>        Explicitly putting that content into `/etc/multipath.conf` will work when you start `multipathd` as described below,
>        but the change in `/etc` will not persist across node reboots.  To solve that problem, you should add another
>        file to `/oem` that will re-generate `/etc/multipath.conf` when the node reboots.  The following example
>        will create the `/etc/multipath.conf` given in the example above, but may need to be modified for your
>        environment if you have a more complex iSCSI configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        This example only works if NetApp is the only storage provider in the system for which `multipathd` must be used. More complex environments will require a more complex configuration.

       Explicitly putting that content into `/etc/multipath.conf` will work when you start `multipathd` as described below, but the change in `/etc` will not persist across node reboots. To solve that problem, add another file to `/oem` that will re-generate `/etc/multipath.conf` when the node reboots. The following example will create the `/etc/multipath.conf` given in the example above. Still, it may need to be modified for your environment if you have a more complex iSCSI configuration:
```

Author: done

       ```text
       stages:
          initramfs:
            - name: "Configure multipath blacklist and whitelist"
              files:
              - path: /etc/multipath.conf
                permissions: 0644
                owner: 0
                group: 0
                content: |
                  blacklist {
                      device {
                          vendor "!NETAPP"
                          product "!LUN"
                       }
                   }
                   blacklist_exceptions {
                       device {
                           vendor "NETAPP"
                           product "LUN"
                       }
                   }
       ```

>        Again, this has to be done on every node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       Remember, this has to be done on every node.
```

Author: done

>    1. Enable multipathd

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Enable multipathd.
```

Author: done

>     Adding the above files to `/oem` will take effect on the next reboot of the node;
>     `multipathd` can be enabled immediately without rebooting the node
>     using the following commands:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Adding the above files to `/oem` will take effect on the next reboot of the node; `multipathd` can be enabled immediately without rebooting the node using the following commands:
```

Author: Done.  I only just realized that some of what you changed before was to join multiple lines of text into a single line, which I guess affects how markdown decides where to put the line breaks.  Going back to adjust all of the previous corrections I'm making to match that change.

      ```shell
      systemctl enable multipathd
      systemctl start multipathd
      ```

>       After the above steps, the `ontap-san-economy` storage class should be available for use when creating a volume for a Harvester VM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      After the above steps, the `ontap-san-economy` storage class should be available when creating a volume for a Harvester VM.
```

Author: done
